Update Fee Model for readability and add refund section (#445)
matter-labs/zksync-web-era-docs: docs/dev/developer-guides/transactions/fee-model.md

	 - On zkSync Era the opposite is true: as contract bytecode is only published once, updating the constructor parameters alone leads to substantial fee savings.

## Gas estimation for transactions

Ethereum has a constant of 21000 gas that covers the intrinsic costs of processing a transaction, i.e. checking the signature and updating the nonce for the account.

On zkSync Era this varies because we support custom and paymaster accounts. These accounts require a (usually) higher amount of gas than EOAs. zkSync Era provides functions for estimating the cost of a transaction regardless of the type of account.

The transaction fee estimate depends on the entire transaction flow, including validation and execution. The `eth_estimateGas` function uses binary search to find the smallest gas value under which the transaction succeeds.

For any Rust developers interested in the zkSync Era implementation for gas estimation, see the Rust code in our repo.

### Transaction length

zkSync Era publishes state diffs on-chain. The cost of the transaction, however, may still depend on transaction length because the sequencer stores long transactions in-memory.

> Long transactions incur additional costs during interactions with an account. zkSync Era works with different types of accounts and we, therefore, cannot make assumptions about signature length. Furthermore, given that a signature (and thus its length) is unavailable at the time of fee estimation, we cannot precisely estimate the cost of such a transaction. To mitigate this, we multiply the recommended cost of the transaction by a small percentage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Long transactions incur additional costs during interactions with an account. zkSync Era works with different types of accounts, and therefore the protocol cannot make assumptions about signature length. Furthermore, given that a signature (and thus its length) is unavailable at the time of fee estimation, we cannot precisely estimate the cost of such a transaction. To mitigate this, we multiply the recommended cost of the transaction by a small percentage.

# Fee mechanism

zkSync Era's fee model is similar to Ethereum’s where `gas` is charged for computational cost, cost of publishing data on-chain and storage effects. However, zkSync Era includes additional costs for publishing to L1 and for proof generation.

Because the L1 gas price for publishing data (on L1) is so volatile, the amount of required L2 `gas` is variable.
Therefore, for each block, the zkSync Era sequencer defines the following dynamic parameters:

- `gasPrice`: the price, in gwei, of a unit of gas.
- `gasPerPubdata`: the amount of `gas` for publishing one byte of data on Ethereum.

:::warning Important
- Only the L2 state storage slot updates are published on L1. 
- For example, if the same storage slot is updated 10 times in the same rollup batch, only the final update is published on Ethereum and there is therefore only one gas charge.
:::

## Fee model overview

In Ethereum, opcodes have unique gas prices. However, opcode costs remain constant and only change with hard forks. For more information, read the [Ethereum opcode documentation](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/evm/opcodes/).

> In zkSync Era, most of the opcode costs are also constant and only change with protocol upgrades. However, storage write charges remain dynamic due to the fluctuation of gas price on L1. See the [zkSync opcode documentation](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-zkevm_opcode_defs/blob/9307543b9ca51bd80d4f5c85d6eb80efd8b19bb2/src/lib.rs#L227) for an idea of how we calculate them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In zkSync Era, unlike in Ethereum where each opcode has a fixed gas price, storage write charges remain dynamic due to the fluctuation of gas price on L1. Other opcode prices are constant, similar to Ethereum. See the [zkSync opcode documentation](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-zkevm_opcode_defs/blob/9307543b9ca51bd80d4f5c85d6eb80efd8b19bb2/src/lib.rs#L227) for an idea of how we calculate them.

> 

Reviewer 2: high level comment:

this document is covering both very high level concepts (like 'refunds') with very detailed information (how we replace the signatures when doing fee estimations) - and they are 'combined' together.

I'd suggest putting the high level information on top of the doc and then the details.

things that should be on top:
* that gas consists of 2 parts (compute + publishing to L1)
* that we do refunds - and that some tooling might not show it correctly

And only then diving into details.

Author: Disagree as this doc will get bigger, no doubt, and what appears now to be just high level information may have more detailed content in the future. Ideally, we would have one page per topic in lower level menus.

# Fee mechanism

> The zkSync Era fee model is similar to Ethereum’s where `gas` is charged for computational cost, cost of publishing data on-chain, and storage effects. However, zkSync Era includes additional costs of publishing to L1 and proof generation.

Author: never say Era on it's own

> The zkSync Era fee model is similar to Ethereum’s where `gas` is charged for computational cost, cost of publishing data on-chain, and storage effects. However, zkSync Era includes additional costs of publishing to L1 and proof generation.

Reviewer: Why not? As far as I understand, we are transitioning to be called Era

> The zkSync Era fee model is similar to Ethereum’s where `gas` is charged for computational cost, cost of publishing data on-chain, and storage effects. However, zkSync Era includes additional costs of publishing to L1 and proof generation.

Reviewer: For example, see our logo under WAGMI: https://www.ethcc.io/

> The zkSync Era fee model is similar to Ethereum’s where `gas` is charged for computational cost, cost of publishing data on-chain, and storage effects. However, zkSync Era includes additional costs of publishing to L1 and proof generation.

Author: let me check with the powers that be ...

Because the gas price for publishing data on L1 is so volatile, the amount of required `gas` on L2 is variable. 
Therefore, for each block, the zkSync Era sequencer defines the following dynamic parameters:

- `gasPrice`: a general reference for the price of a unit of gas.
- `gasPerPubdata`: amount of `gas` for publishing one byte of data to Ethereum.

:::warning Important

> - Only storage slot updates are published on zkSync Era. 

Reviewer: It is L1. I'd remove the zkSync Era part, it's not really helpful. you can add L2: "Only L2 storage slot updates are published on L1"

> - Only storage slot updates are published on zkSync Era. 

Author: done

> - For example, if the same storage slot is updated 10 times in the same rollup block, for example, only the final update is published on Ethereum and there is therefore only one gas charge.

Author: @vladbochok please confirm which L2 transaction is charged for it?

duplication removed.

> - For example, if the same storage slot is updated 10 times in the same rollup block, for example, only the final update is published on Ethereum and there is therefore only one gas charge.

Reviewer: It is the first tx that the user pays for -- though I'd say that it doesn't really makes sense to pin down a specific tx. The user has already paid for a storage change on L1, and now they can do as many as they want (within the same block)

> - For example, if the same storage slot is updated 10 times in the same rollup block, for example, only the final update is published on Ethereum and there is therefore only one gas charge.

Author: OK, I'm going to resolve this one with no change.

:::

## Fee model overview

In Ethereum, opcodes have distinct and varying gas prices. However, opcode costs remain constant and only change with hard forks. For more information, read the [Ethereum opcode documentation](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/evm/opcodes/).

> In zkSync Era, most of the opcode costs are also constant and only change with protocol upgrades. However, storage write charges remain dynamic due to the fluctuation of gas price on L1. See the [zkSync opcode documentation](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-zkevm_opcode_defs/blob/9307543b9ca51bd80d4f5c85d6eb80efd8b19bb2/src/lib.rs#L227) for an idea of how we calculate them.

Author: ok, please go ahead and make the suggestion

> In zkSync Era, most of the opcode costs are also constant and only change with protocol upgrades. However, storage write charges remain dynamic due to the fluctuation of gas price on L1. See the [zkSync opcode documentation](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-zkevm_opcode_defs/blob/9307543b9ca51bd80d4f5c85d6eb80efd8b19bb2/src/lib.rs#L227) for an idea of how we calculate them.

Reviewer: I thought I did

> In zkSync Era, most of the opcode costs are also constant and only change with protocol upgrades. However, storage write charges remain dynamic due to the fluctuation of gas price on L1. See the [zkSync opcode documentation](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-zkevm_opcode_defs/blob/9307543b9ca51bd80d4f5c85d6eb80efd8b19bb2/src/lib.rs#L227) for an idea of how we calculate them.

Reviewer: here: https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-web-era-docs/pull/445#discussion_r1177635865

> In zkSync Era, most of the opcode costs are also constant and only change with protocol upgrades. However, storage write charges remain dynamic due to the fluctuation of gas price on L1. See the [zkSync opcode documentation](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-zkevm_opcode_defs/blob/9307543b9ca51bd80d4f5c85d6eb80efd8b19bb2/src/lib.rs#L227) for an idea of how we calculate them.

Author: yes, i mean actually write it please, and I can proof and commit

> In zkSync Era, most of the opcode costs are also constant and only change with protocol upgrades. However, storage write charges remain dynamic due to the fluctuation of gas price on L1. See the [zkSync opcode documentation](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-zkevm_opcode_defs/blob/9307543b9ca51bd80d4f5c85d6eb80efd8b19bb2/src/lib.rs#L227) for an idea of how we calculate them.

Author: there are some other considerations, protocol changes versus hardfork, i'm not sure exactly what you're suggesting so if you can submit it, that would be very helpful

> In zkSync Era, most of the opcode costs are also constant and only change with protocol upgrades. However, storage write charges remain dynamic due to the fluctuation of gas price on L1. See the [zkSync opcode documentation](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-zkevm_opcode_defs/blob/9307543b9ca51bd80d4f5c85d6eb80efd8b19bb2/src/lib.rs#L227) for an idea of how we calculate them.

Reviewer: https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-web-era-docs/pull/445/commits/0ba99803b4fc587b2277578968d4f09a705fc4ff

> In zkSync Era, most of the opcode costs are also constant and only change with protocol upgrades. However, storage write charges remain dynamic due to the fluctuation of gas price on L1. See the [zkSync opcode documentation](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-zkevm_opcode_defs/blob/9307543b9ca51bd80d4f5c85d6eb80efd8b19bb2/src/lib.rs#L227) for an idea of how we calculate them.

Author: LGTM.

In general, the execution of arithmetic operations, which do not involve storage updates, is cheap. Like Ethereum, the most costly operation is a storage update.

One advantage of zkSync Era rollups over other optimistic rollups is that, instead of publishing all transaction data, zkSync Era rollups only publish state diffs, thus making fewer storage updates.

> Another advantage of zkSync Era rollups is cost-effective contract redeployment. An example use case for this could be a DEX and a `PairFactory` factory for different `Pair` pools. The contract bytecode of `Pair` is only published when the first instance is deployed. After that, subsequent deployments only involve updating one storage slot which sets the contract code hash on the newly deployed `Pair` address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A big advantage of zkSync Era over optimistic rollups is that, instead of publishing all transaction data to L1, Era only publishes state diffs, thus publishing significantly less data to L1. Another advantage of Era is the cost-effective contract redeployment. An example is a DEX with a `PairFactory` contract for different `Pair` pools. The contract bytecode of `Pair` is only published when the first instance is deployed. After that, subsequent deployments only involve updating one storage slot which sets the contract code hash on the newly deployed `Pair` address.

### Design recommendations

> - **Update storage slots as little as possible:** The cost of execution is a lot smaller than the cost of storage updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Update storage slots as little as possible:** check if your code can avoid unnecessary storage updates.
```
I don't see how the case for execution is meaningful here -- we talk about design of storage updates.

Author: we said it already also

> - **Reuse as many storage slots as possible:** Only the state diff is published on Ethereum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Reuse as many storage slots as possible:** only the final state diff is published on Ethereum.

Author: US English preferred.

- **Reuse the contract code where possible:**
	 - On Ethereum, avoiding constructor parameters and putting them into constants reduces some of the gas costs upon contract deployment.
	 - On zkSync Era the opposite is true: as contract bytecode is only published once, updating the constructor parameters alone leads to substantial fee savings.

## Gas estimation for transactions

Ethereum has a constant of 21000 gas that covers the intrinsic costs of processing a transaction, i.e. checking the signature and updating the nonce for the account.

On zkSync Era this varies because we support custom and paymaster accounts. These accounts require a (usually) higher amount of gas than EOAs. zkSync Era provides functions for estimating the cost of a transaction regardless of the type of account.

The transaction fee estimate depends on the entire transaction flow, including validation and execution. The `eth_estimateGas` function uses binary search to find the smallest gas value under which the transaction succeeds.

> For any Rust developers interested in the zkSync Era implementation for gas estimation, see the Rust code in our repo.

Author: @vladbochok do you have a link?

> For any Rust developers interested in the zkSync Era implementation for gas estimation, see the Rust code in our repo.

Author: added

### Transaction length

zkSync Era publishes state diffs on-chain. The cost of the transaction, however, may still depend on transaction length because the sequencer stores long transactions in-memory.

> Long transactions incur additional costs during interactions with an account. zkSync Era works with many types of accounts and so we cannot make assumptions about signature length. Furthermore, given that a signature (and thus its length) is unavailable at the time of fee estimation, we cannot precisely estimate the cost of such a transaction. To mitigate this, we multiply the recommended cost of the transaction by a small percentage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Long transactions incur additional costs during interactions with an account. zkSync Era works with differet types of accounts and it cannot make assumptions about signature length. Furthermore, given that a signature (and thus its length) is unavailable at the time of fee estimation, we cannot precisely estimate the cost of such a transaction. To mitigate this, we multiply the recommended cost of the transaction by a small percentage.
```
There are really only 2 types: EOAs and AA ("smart accounts")

Reviewer: Let's avoid "we" whenever possible: I think we can use "the protocol" here.

Author: I like we, it's inclusive ..

Reviewer: Once the sequencer becomes decentralised, there would not be a "we"...

Author: we means everyone, for full decentralization there is only "we", but it's not a big deal, the protocol is probably better

Author: go ahead and suggest again and i'll commit

This ensures the `DefaultAccount`’s `payForTransaction` function runs successfully.

This is different to the Geth implementation which uses `tx.gasprice = 0` to make sure that the user can pay the fee even though the `tx.origin` in the simulation may not have any balance at all.

:::warning
Due to this, custom accounts may unexpectedly contain more balance than they have on-chain during the validation step, which may affect their behavior.
:::

## Refunds

A gas estimate may be higher than the actual cost of the transaction. This means users usually only spend a portion of the estimated transaction cost.

The (notional concept) of refund, therefore, returns the unpaid transaction fee portion to the user.

:::tip
- Only one transaction is recorded on the block, even if a portion of the original estimate is refunded.

> - Users can compare their token balance against the transaction cost on the block explorer to verify they did not overspend.

Reviewer 2: what do you mean by 'overspend'?

- Users may see no notification in their wallet depending on which wallet they use.
:::

Refunds are calculated by defining a fair value for the amount the user spent on the transaction and subtracting it from the actual spend.

## Out-of-gas errors

Unlike on Geth, it is impossible to track out-of-gas errors on zkSync Era. 

> The main reason is that the “actual” execution happens inside the `DefaultAccount` system contract and, due to the 63/64 rule, when a high number of gas is provided, the call to the `execute` function of the `DefaultAccount` will NOT fail, even if it is out of gas, although the subcall to the `transaction.to` contract will fail with an out of gas error.

Author: Added a link to the EIP explaining 63/64
